The freemium business model allows users to
use the basic features of a software or service,
but charges for upgrades to this service.
For example, Slack, a business
communication tool that allows instant messaging between team mates,
has a free model for teams while making its revenue from companies who
choose to upgrade for additional features like unlimited third party integrations.
Another example of the freemium model is Spotify,
a music playing service.
Free Spotify users get the same abilities as paid users
to listen to unlimited music, make playlists, etc.
Instead of offering additional features,
paid Spotify subscribers get the benefit of not
needing to hear ads between the songs they're listening to.
For a freemium business model,
KPI should concentrate on those users who actually pay for the service.
This means key metrics to track would be the number of paying subscribers.
A closely related KPI would be tracking the conversion rate,
which is the percent of free subscribers who choose to upgrade.
While the freemium model supports free use,
simply having many users is not as important as the number and percent of
users who find the product valuable enough to pay for it.Just like a SaaS product,
the renewal rate of access to the paid version of
the product will directly impact continued revenue.
Finally, a leading indicator that a user is likely to
renew their paid use is whether customers are satisfied.
The Product Manager for a freemium product must track paid customer
satisfaction.If the paid version of the product operates on a subscription model.
There are many different business models,
but the eCommerce, SAAS,
and freemium business models covered in this section are
three that modern Product Managers are likely to see.
When choosing KPIs, it is important to consider how your product makes its revenue.
Whenever possible, KPI should focus on how revenue is generated by a business model.
The KPIs can take two forms.
First, metrics that directly impact revenue,
such as the number of purchases for
an eCommerce company or the renewal rate for a SAAS product.
Second, KPIs that act as leading indicators about whether
revenue related metrics like purchases and renewal rates are going to go up or down.
Customer satisfaction rates and the number of customer support tickets are two such KPIs.
Product Managers have access to a lot of data,
but by keeping in mind the business model of your company,
you can determine the best fit KPIs to track.
To ensure your products and features are on the path to success.